### Thesis

The scripts and method listed here after referred to in the thesis.

## Part 1 Method: SRA to PGCNA
Mathhew Care wrote the scripts, or provided instructions on writing the scripts in this section. 

# This method takes raw SRA files, or can be started at raw RNAseq files, through a nextflow pipeline up to initial PGCNA outputs for downstream analysis.
# The pipeline up to running PGCNA2 is described in the thesis, and uses the following scripts, configs and files:

# Scripts used:
1) getGenomes.sh
2) make_EBV_genome.sh
3) cat_GTF.sh
4) cat_fa.sh
5) getFetching.sh
6) rnaseq_rsem.sh
7) 2025.06.09_ProcessRNAseq_V2.0.R
8) addGeneSymbolFromGeneIDwithGTFfile.py
9) pythonOnNode.sh
10) annotateForPGCNA.sh
11) annotateGeneUsingMyGeneInfo.py
12) renameRedundantGenesInExpFile.py


# Configs used:
1) nextflow.config_rnaseq

# Files to process scripts
1) tx2gene_nrGencodev48.csv
2) samplesheet.txt # change the samples listed here
3) #FileInfo_example.txt
4) #myGeneAnn_AllSigs_2023.09.13_WithGO-K.txt
5) coorGenes.txt

# Running PGCNA2
This part of the process uses a nextflow wrapper, pulled from the GitHub of Matthew Care, which is not yet publically available. 
PGCNA2 is publically available without the nextflow wrapper from https://github.com/medmaca/PGCNA
The code to run PGCNA2 via nextflow is in the following format:

nextflow run <PrivateGitHubRepository> -r main \
--pgcna_data /PATH/PGCNA_work/Post_R_Kushwaha/ForPGCNA \
--pgcna_gse_geneset /PATH/PGCNA_work/Post_R_Kushwaha/ForPGCNA/#myGeneAnn_AllSigs_2023.09.13_WithGO-K.txt \
--pgcna_f 0.3 \
--pgcna_n 1000 \
--pgcna_b 100 \
-profile apptainer,slurm_aire \
-resume

Notes: change settings of f, n and b as required, defined in thesis, section 4.1
       use -resume after the first run

## Part 2 Method: Downstream PGCNA exploration

Matthew Care provided the scripts and file PGCNA_downstream.pdf, which is not publically available. 

Scripts used for downstream PGCNA analysis:
1) clusterStability.py
2) clusterStabilityToGeneSet.py
3) geneSetOverlaps_v2.py

Instructions to run Gephi were provided by Matthew Care, but tutorials are available online.
# Locally host the Gephi network
1. Locally generate the network on Gephi and export this to a sigma.js template.
2. Host the network on a http server, for example in python:
python -m http.server
http://localhost:8000/
3. Visualise network on the server, and explore it. 

# Module stability analysis
Best clustering has been used for the visualisation. Compare to the other clusterings generated by PGCNA. 
1. Use clusterStability.py and see PGCNA_downstream for addition settings info. This generates #clusterInfo.txt and *_geneSums.txt, which tell us how many times the genes in the module are present in other clusterings. 

# Module gene set
Uses the output from clusterStability.py. 
1. Use clusterStabilityToGeneSet.py. See PGCNA_downstream.pdf for additional settings info.
2. If the script stops after a module before it reaches the end of the list (due to there being no genes at the threshold set by MIN_PERCENT across clusterings in the dataset) re-run at a lower threshold. The recommended starting point is 80, 0 is all genes included. 
3. Note that for each variation of MIN_PERCENT will generate a new geneSet_Clust*_minCI*.txt file, but overwrites the totalStability_Clust*.txt file. 

# Network Module Overlaps
Use the UPDATED (to newer python version) geneSetOverlaps_v2.py. Setting information in PGCNA_downstream.pdf.
1. To compare the modules in the BEST clustering, put the Clust* folder from /PGCNA/Selected/ into the geneLists folder. 
2. Run the script. Check it has called the information correctly by viewing the pdf or the *Log10values.txt document to make sure the correct number of modules are listed for each group in the comparrison. 


## Part 3 Method: PGCNA to Panel
# This method enables building of gene panels for research laboratory use from PGCNA data. 
# The method presented here is bespoke to our research questions and technical limitations. In short: non-coding genes, highly expressed genes likely to 'soak up' reads and ribosomal genes are excluded. Everything else was retained and stratified by rank and module representation, for selection into the gene panel based on how many genes could be included (cost) and duplicates already represented in an existing panel were exlcuded. 

Matthew Care provided the scripts for targeted gene panel development.

Scripts used for targeted panel development:


# Module Neighbourhoods
Uses jupyter notebook.
1. Run automaticModuleRefinement_v2.ipynb. Change the workfolder, edges and modules as per PGCNA_Downstream.pdf.


# Network Module Signature Enrichments
See section of the same name in PGCNA_Downstream.pdf for a list of heatmap generation options. Online tools such as https://software.broadinstitute.org/morpheus/ can be used. 

# Module gene weighted degree
This is part of the pipeline used to design a panel as well.
1. Run getWeightDegreePerModule_AF.py

# Module/Neighbourhood Expression Values
This can be re-run when the modules have been given names to update the output with useful names on it. 
1. Run rankedGenesToMEVs_selectByDatasetCorr.py
I have kept the following settings for my run, for further infomation see PGCNA_Downstream.pfd
MIN_GENE_NUMBER = 5 (default)
GENE_PER_MEV = 10 (default)
2. If desried, heatmaps can be made for each dataset that makes up a PGCNA. For example, if a PGCNA is made of 3 experiments a heatmap can be generated for experiment 1, 2 and 3. More detail in PGCNA_Downstream.pdf.

## Gene signature enrichment analysis

# Gene signature enrichment analysis - single folder of lists
This runs in the terminal. If that is not helpful and a node is required, see testGenesForGeneSetEnrichmentFastPY3_onNode.py as a structure suggestion, which also shows how it would be written in terminal. 
1. Run testGenesForGeneSetEnrichmentFastPY3.py. Note that the file given on this repository: Databases/#myGeneAllSigs_2021.07.09_WithGO-J.txt.gz will need to be unzipped before use. Further info on parameters in PGCNA_Downstream.pdf.



## Part 3 Method: Analysis of PGCNA Network
# Scripts to build a pipeline manually and enable robust/thorough analysis of the PGCNA data.








### Part 1: SRA to PGCNA
## Dependencies and installed versions:
# Use nextflow.config_rnaseq for all of this pipeline. This config also works for any standard raw rnaseq files.
# Python 3. I used 3.12.9